.TH XANDIKOS-MILTER "8" "May 2026" "xandikos" "System Administration Utilities"
.SH NAME
xandikos-milter \- Postfix/Sendmail milter for inbound iMIP scheduling
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xandikos-milter
\fB\-\-lmtp\-socket\fR \fITARGET\fR
\fB\-\-listen\fR \fITARGET\fR
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B xandikos-milter
\fB\-\-server\-url\fR \fIURL\fR
\fB\-\-listen\fR \fITARGET\fR
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xandikos-milter
runs a libmilter-protocol server that Postfix or Sendmail can hand each
inbound message to. If the message carries a valid iMIP REQUEST, REPLY
or CANCEL (RFC 6047), the message is forwarded to a running Xandikos
for storage in the schedule inbox. The message is always accepted, so
normal mailbox delivery proceeds.

Two transports are supported. Exactly one must be configured:
.TP
.B LMTP (recommended)
With \fB\-\-lmtp\-socket\fR, the milter forwards the raw RFC 5322
message to a running
.B xandikos serve \-\-imip\-listen
endpoint. This is symmetric with the existing iMIP LMTP listener and is
the cleanest setup when the milter and Xandikos run on the same host.
.TP
.B HTTP fallback
With \fB\-\-server\-url\fR, the extracted iTIP payload is POSTed to a
Xandikos schedule-inbox URL. Use this when the milter and Xandikos run
on different hosts and you want HTTPS + HTTP Basic credentials between
them.
.PP
Messages that carry an
.B Auto-Submitted
header other than
.B no
(RFC 3834) are skipped to avoid loops between two Xandikos instances.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-lmtp\-socket\fR TARGET
LMTP endpoint of a running
.BR "xandikos serve \-\-imip\-listen" .
Pass \fBunix:/path/to/sock\fR for a Unix domain socket or
\fBhost:port\fR for TCP. May also be set via
\fBXANDIKOS_MILTER_LMTP_SOCKET\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-server\-url\fR URL
Schedule-inbox URL of a running Xandikos server. Each iMIP payload is
POSTed here as
.BR text/calendar .
May also be set via \fBXANDIKOS_MILTER_SERVER_URL\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-username\fR USER
Username for HTTP Basic authentication against \fB\-\-server\-url\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-password\-file\fR FILE
File containing the HTTP Basic authentication password.
.TP
\fB\-\-unix\-socket\fR PATH
Unix domain socket path for HTTP requests to the Xandikos server
(useful when Xandikos itself listens on a Unix socket).
.TP
\fB\-\-listen\fR TARGET
Listen target. Pass \fBunix:/path/to/sock\fR for a Unix domain socket,
or \fBhost:port\fR for TCP. Postfix uses this as
\fBsmtpd_milters=\fITARGET\fR. May also be set via
\fBXANDIKOS_MILTER_LISTEN\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-listen\-mode\fR MODE
File mode (octal, e.g. \fB660\fR) for the Unix socket. Ignored for TCP
listeners.
.TP
\fB\-\-listen\-group\fR GROUP
Group ownership for the Unix socket. Ignored for TCP listeners.
.SH POSTFIX CONFIGURATION
Add the milter to
.B main.cf
so that Postfix consults it during SMTP intake:
.PP
.RS
smtpd_milters = unix:/run/xandikos/milter.sock
.br
non_smtpd_milters = $smtpd_milters
.br
milter_default_action = accept
.RE
.PP
\fBmilter_default_action = accept\fR ensures Postfix keeps delivering
mail if the milter is unreachable.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xandikos (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Jelmer Vernooij <jelmer@debian.org>
